What is Escorting?

Escorting is an official process in which a child is taken away from an environment that is dangerous. This process is enacted by Oranga Tamariki, or the Ministry for Children, as it is better known-the government agency of issues surrounding the welfare of children.

Types of Escorting

Planned Escorts:

Planned removals are those that are pre-arranged, where Oranga Tamariki work with the families and other agencies about the strategy for a child's relocation. The process involves thorough assessments and planning that need to be carried out to ensure the safety and well-being of the child.

Urgent Uplifting:

Urgent removals are those in which the child is at imminent risk, and something needs to be done straight away to ensure their safety. It may be that a child is considered at immediate risk of harm, and Oranga Tamariki may not have to notify the family but go straight into taking action to keep the child safe.

Process of Escorting

Risk Assessment:

A very careful risk assessment is carried out to review the environment and decide whether there is a requirement for escorting the child for safety purposes.

Oranga Tamariki loses custody when any other person or agency takes legal custody of the child.

Authority to Escort and Escorting Conditions:



Escort is granted by a manager at Oranga Tamariki, and conditions include the fact that:

There should be a minimum of two escort staff who have had.

An escort of the same gender as the child whenever possible

The staff have to be well trained to handle de-escelation 





Risk assessment and planning of the journey



Informed Escort Strategy:
This is a strategy that involves a lot of planning and communication, with information provided to all parties, including the child, the family, and caregivers, so that all are aware of the reason for and the procedure for the escort (planned escorts).

Refer to Oranga Tamariki's escorting policy for further information on these processes.
Legal Parent Rights: https://communitylaw.org.nz/community-law-manual/test/family-matters/oranga-tamariki/ 

Parents have some legal rights in the process of escorting, such as:

Being informed in advance of plans for escorting their child.

A chance to comment and express views about what occurs during the escorting process.

Access to Information: Being informed of the reasons for escorting and where the child is being taken.



Legal Rights of Caregivers

Caregivers also have some rights, including:

Notified decisions:

Being informed regarding any escorting arrangement that involves the child in their care.

Support: Receiving the necessary assistance and support in order for the child to prepare themselves with the escort.

Participation: An opportunity to have their views heard and to raise concerns about their child. 

For more detailed information on caregiver's rights, refer to the policies of Oranga Tamariki on the processes they follow for allegations of harm in care/custody situations: https://www.howtolaw.co/know-your-rights-when-a-child-is-removed-from-your-care-392254 





Who takes custody of the child after removal?
The child that is taken away from home falls into the custody of Oranga Tamariki - Ministry for Children. This child will be sent to stay with a family member or somebody that he or she knows well. In case this may not be practicable or appropriate, the child could be placed into a ministry home or residence.

Unless there is a good reason against it, you should be told as soon as possible about what is happening and why, and about what is likely to happen in the future. You may also telephone the Ministry at any time of day or night for information.

When a child is taken away from home and put into care by Oranga Tamariki - Ministry for Children, it must be brought before a Family Court within five days. You will be advised of the court decision.



https://www.howtolaw.co/know-your-rights-when-a-child-is-removed-from-your-care-392254 



